Appeal No. LXVI of 1949.
Appeal from the High Court of judicature, Bombay, in a reference under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1022.
K.M. Munshi (N. P. Nathvani, with him), for the appel lant. ' M.C. Setalvad, Attorney General for India (H. J. Umrigar, with him), for the respondent. 1950.
May 26.
The judgment of the Court was delivered by MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN J.
This is an appeal against a judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in an income tax matter and it raises the question whether munici pal property tax and urban immoveable property tax payable under the relevant Bombay Acts are allowable deductions under section 9 (1) (iv) of the Indian Income tax Act.
The assessee company is an investment company deriving its income from properties in the city of Bombay.
For the assessment year 1940 41 the net income of the assessee under the head "property" was computed by the Income tax Officer in the sum of Rs. 6,21,764 after deducting from gross rents certain payments.
The company had paid during the relevant year Rs. 1,22,675 as municipal property tax and Rs. 32,760 as urban property tax.
Deduction of these two sums was claimed under the provisions of section 9 the Act.
Out of the first item a deduction in the sum of Rs. 48,572 was allowed on the ground that this item represented tenants ' burdens paid by the assessee, otherwise the claim was disal lowed.
The, appeals of the assessee to the Appellate As sistant Commissioner and to the Income tax Appellate Tribu nal were unsuccessful.
The Tribunal, however, agreed to refer two questions of law to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, namely, (1) Whether the municipal taxes paid by the applicant company are an allowable deduction under 555 the provisions of section 9 (1) (iv) of the Indian Income tax Act; (2) Whether the urban immoveable property taxes paid by the applicant company are an allowable deduction under section 9 (1) (iv) or under section 9 (1) (v) of the Indian Income tax Act.
A supplementary reference was made covering a third question which was not raised before us and it is not there fore necessary to refer to it.
The High Court answered all the three questions in the negative and hence this appeal.
The question for our determination is whether the munic ipal property tax and urban immoveable property tax can be deducted as an allowance under clause (iv) of sub section (1) of section 9 of the Act.
The decision of the point depends firstly on the construction of the language employed in sub clause (iv) of sub section (1) of section 9 of the Act, and secondly, on a finding as to the true nature and character of the liability of the owner under the relevant Bombay Acts for the payment of these taxes.
Section 9 along with the relevant clause runs thus: (1) The tax shall be payable by an assessee under the head ' income from property ' in respect of the bona fide annual value of property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of Which he is the owner, . . subject to the following allowances, namely : (iv) where the property is subject to a mortgage or other capital charge, the amount of any interest on such mortgage or charge; where the property is subject to an annual charge not being a capital charge, the. amount of such charge; where the property is subject to a ground rent, the amount of such ground rent; and, where the property has been acquired, constructed, repaired, renewed or recon structed with borrowed capital, the amount of any interest payable on such capital; . . . " It will be seen that clause (iv) consists of four sub clauses corresponding to the four deductions allowed 556 under the clause.
Before the amending Act of 1939, clause (iv) contained only the first, third and fourth sub clauses.
Under the first sub clause interest is deductible whether the amount borrowed on the security of the property was spent on the property or not.
There is no question of any capital or other expenditure on the property.
The expression "capital charge" in the sub clause cannot connote a charge on the capital, that is, the property assessed.
That would be a redundancy as the opening words themselves clearly indicate that the charge is on the property.
We are therefore of opinion that capital charge here could only mean a charge created for a capital sum, i.e., a charge to secure the discharge of a liability of a capital nature.
In 1933 the Privy Council decided the case of Bijoy Singh.
Dudhuria vs Commissioner of Income tax, Calcutta (1 ).
It was not an assessment under section 9 but an assess ment on the general income of an assessee who was liable to pay maintenance for his step mother which had been charged on all his assets by a decree of Court.
It was not a li ability voluntarily incurred by him but one cast on him by law.
The Privy Council held that the amount paid by him in discharge of that liability formed no part of his real income and so should not be included in his assessment.
Though the decision proceeded on the principle that the outgoings were not part of the assessee 's income at all, the framers of the amending Act of 1939 wanted, apparently, to extend the principle, so far as the assessment of property was concerned, even to cases where obligatory payments had to be made out of the assessee 's income from the property charged with such payments, and the second sub clause, namely, "where the property is subject to an annual charge not being a capital charge, the amount of such charge" was added.
It is this sub clause which the appellant invokes in support of its claim to deduction of the municipal and urban, property taxes in the present case.
In view of the opening words of the newly added sub clause, the expression "capital charge" also used therein cannot have reference to a charge on the property, and we think it must (1) I.L.R. 60 cal.
557 be understood in the same sense as in sub clause (1); that is to say, the first sub clause having provided for deduc tion of interest where a capital sum is charged on the property, this sub clause provides for a deduction of annual sums so charged, such sums not being capital sums, the limiting words being intended to exclude cases where capital raised on the security of the property is made repayable in instalments.
In Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Mahomedbhoy Rowji (1), a Bench of the Bombay High Court considered the meaning of these words.
As regards "annual charge," Beau mont C.J. observed as follows : "The words, I think, would cover a charge to secure an annual liability." Kania J., as he then was, said as follows : "I do not see how a charge can be annual unless it means a charge in respect of a payment to be made annually." This construction of the words has been followed in the judgment under appeal.
In Gappumal Kanhaiya Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax (2) (the connected appeal before us), the Bench of the Allahabad High Court agreed with the construction placed on these words in the Bombay case, i.e., the words "annual charge" mean a charge to secure an annual liability.
It is therefore clear that there is no conflict of judicial deci sions as to the meaning of the phrase "annual charge" occur ring in section 3 (1) (iv) and the meaning given is the natural meaning of these words.
As to the phrase "capital charge", Beaumont C.J. in the case above referred to took the view that the words mean a charge on capital.
Kania J., however, took a different view and observed that he was not prepared to accept the sugges tion that a document which provides for a certain payment to be made monthly or annually and charged on immoveable property or the estate of an individual becomes a capital charge.
In the Allahabad judgment under appeal these (1) I.L.R. (2) I.L.R. 1944 All.
558 words were considered as not meaning a charge on capital.
It was said that if an annual charge means a charge to secure the discharge of an annual liability, then, capital charge means a charge to secure the discharge of a liability of a capital nature.
We think this construction is a natu ral construction of the section and is right.
The determination of the point whether the taxes in dispute fall within the ambit of the phrase "annual charge not being a capital charge" depends on the provisions of the statutes under which they are levied.
Section 143 of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, authorises the levy of a general tax on all buildings and lands in the city.
The primary responsibility to pay this property tax is on the lessor (vide section 146 of the Act).
In order to assess the tax provision has been made for the determination of the annual rateable value of the building in section 154.
Section 156 provides for the maintenance of an assessment book in which entries have to be made every official year of all buildings in the city, their rateable value, the names of persons primarily liable for payment of the property tax on such buildings and of the amount for which each building has been assessed.
Section 167 lays down that the assess ment book need not be prepared every official year but public notices shall be given in accordance with sections 160 to 162 every year and the provisions o+ the said sec tions and of sections 163 and 167 shall be applicable each year.
These sections lay down a procedure for hearing objections and complaints against entries in the assessment book.
From these provisions it is clear ' that the liabil ity for the tax is determined at the beginning of each official year and the tax is an annual one.
It recurs from year to year.
Sections 143to 168 concern themselves with the imposition, liability and assessment of the tax for the year.
The amount of the tax for the year and the liability for its payment having been determined, the Act then pre scribes for its collection in the chapter "The collection of taxes.
" Section 197 provides that each of the property taxes shall be payable in 559 advance in half yearly instalments on each first day of April and each first day of October.
The provision as to half yearly instalment necessarily connotes an annual li ability.
In other words, it means that the annual liability can be discharged by half yearly payments.
Procedure has also been prescribed for recovery of the instalments by presentment of a bill, a notice of demand and then distress, and sale.
Finally section 212 provides as follows : "Property taxes due under this Act in respect of any building or land shall, subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if any, due to the provincial ,Government thereupon, be a first charge . . upon the said build ing or land . " It creates a statutory charge on the building.
Urban immove able property tax is leviable under section 22 of Part VI of the Bombay Finance Act, 1932,on the annual letting value of the property.
The duty to collect the tax is laid on the municipality and it does so in the same manner as in the case of the municipal property tax.
Section 24 (2) (b) is in terms similar to section 212 of the Bombay Municipal Act.
It makes the land or the building security for the payment of this tax also.
For the purposes of section 9 of the Indian Income tax Act both these taxes, namely, the munici pal property tax as well as the urban immoveable property tax are of the same character and stand on the same foot ing.
Mr. Munshi, the learned counsel for the appellant con tended that both the taxes are assessed on the annual value of the land or the building and are annual taxes, although it may be that they are collected at intervals of six months for the sake of convenience, that the income tax itself is assessed on an annual basis, that in allowing deductions all payments made or all liabilities incurred during the previ ous year of assessment should be allowed and that the taxes in question fell clearly within the language of section 9 (1) (iv).
The learned Attorney General, on the other hand, argued that although the taxes are assessed for the year the liability to pay them arises at the beginning 560 of each half year and unless a notice of demand is issued and a bill presented there is no liability to pay them and that till then no charge under section 212 of the Act could possibly arise and that the liability to pay being half yearly in advance, the charge is not an annual charge.
It was also suggested that the taxes were a capital charge in the sense of the property being security for the payment.
We are satisfied that the contentions raised by the learned Attorney General are not sound.
It is apparent from the whole tenor of the two Bombay Acts that the taxes are in the nature of an annual levy on the property ' and are assessed on the annual value of the property each year.
The annual liability can be discharged by half yearly instalments.
The liability being an annual one and the property having been subjected to it, the provisions of clause (iv) of sub sec tion (1) of section 9 are immediately attracted.
Great emphasis was laid on the word"due" used in section 212 of the Municipal Act and it was said that as the taxes do not become due under the Act unless the time for the payment arrives, no charge comes into existence till then and that the charge is not an annual charge.
We do not think that this is a correct construction of section 212.
The words "property taxes due under this Act" mean property taxes for which a person is liable under the Act.
Taxes payable during the year have been made a charge on the property.
The liability and the charge both co exist and are co exten sive.
The provisions of the Act affording facilities for the discharge of the liability do not in any way affect their true nature and character.
If the annual liability is not discharged in the manner laid down by section 197, can it be said that the property cannot be sold for recovery of the whole amount due for the year ? The answer to this query can only be in the affirmative, i.e., that the proper ty is liable to sale.
In Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Mahomedbhoy Rowji(1) Beaumont C.J., while rejecting the claim for the deduction of the taxes, placed reliance on (1) I.L.R. 561 section 9 (1) (v) which allows a deduction in respect of any sums paid on account of land revenue.
It was observed that land revenue stands on the same footing as municipal taxes and that as the legislature made a special provision for deduction of sums payable in regard to land revenue but not in respect of sums paid on account of municipal taxes that circumstance indicated that the deduction was not allowable.
For the same purpose reference was also made to the provi sions of section 10 which deal with business allowances and wherein deduction of any sum paid on account of land reve nue, local rates or municipal taxes has been allowed.
In the concluding part of his judgment the learned Chief Jus tice said that it was not necessary for him to consider what the exact meaning of the words was and that it was suffi cient for him to say that it did not cover municipal taxes which are made a charge on the property under section 212 of the Bombay Municipal Act.
Without determining the exact meaning of the words used by the statute it seems to us it was not possible to arrive at the conclusion that the taxes were not within the ambit of the clause.
It is elementary that the primary duty of a Court is to give effect to the intention of the legislature as expressed in the words used by it and no outside consideration can be called in aid tO find that intention.
Again reference to clause (v) of the section is not very helpful because land revenue is a charge of a paramount nature on all buildings and lands and that being so, a deduction in respect of the amount was mentioned in express terms.
Municipal taxes, on the other hand, do not stand on the same footing as land revenue.
The law as to them varies from province to province and they may not be necessarily a charge on property in all cases.
The legis lature seems to have thought that so far as municipal taxes on property are concerned, if they fall within the ambit of clause (iv), deduction will be claimable in respect of them but not otherwise.
The deductions allowed in section 10 under the head "Income from business" proceed on a different footing and a construction of section 9 with the aid of section 10 is apt to mislead.
562 Kania J. in the above case in arriving at his conclusion was influenced by the consideration that these taxes were of a variable character, i.e., liable to be increased or re duced under the various provisions of the Municipal Act and that the charge was in the nature of a contingent charge.
With great respect, it may be pointed out that all charges in a way may be or are of a variable and contingent na ture.
If no default is made, no charge is ever enforceable and whenever there is a charge, it can be increased or reduced during the year either by payment or by additional borrowing.
In Moss Empires Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioners (1) it was held by the House of Lords that the fact that certain payments were contingent and variable in amount did not affect their character of being annual payments and that the word, "annual" must be taken to have the quality of being recurrent or being capable of recurrence.
In Cunard 's Trustees vs Inland Revenue Commissioners (2) it was held that the payments were capable of being recur rent and were therefore annual payments within the meaning of schedule D, case III, rule 1 (1), even though they were not necessarily recurrent year by year and the fact that they varied in amount was immaterial.
The learned Attorney General in view of these decisions did not support the view expressed by Kania J. Reliance was placed on a decision of the High Court of Madras in Mamad Keyi vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras(3), in which moneys paid as urban immoveable property tax under the Bombay Finance Act were disallowed as inadmis sible under section 9 (1) (iv) or 9 (1) (v) of the Indian Income tax Act. 'This decision merely followed the view expressed in Commissioner of income tax, Bombay vs Mahomedb hoy Rowji (4)and was not arrived at on any independent or fresh reasoning and is not of much assistance in the deci sion of the case.
The Allahabad High Court (1) (2) [1948] 1 A.E.R. 150. (3) I.L.R. (4) I.L.R. 563 in Gappumal Kanhaiya Lal vs Commissioner of Incometax (1) (the connected appeal) took a correct view of this matter and the reasoning given therein has our approval.
The result is that this appeal is allowed and the two questions which were referred to the High Court by the Income tax Tribunal and cited above are answered in the affirmative.
The appellants will have their costs in the appeal.
Appeal allowed.





Civil Appeal No.94 of 1949.
107 834 Appeal from a judgment and decree of the High Court of Judi cature at Patna in Appeal from Appellate Decree No. 97 of 1946 (Mannohar Lall and Mukherji JJ.) dated 23rd Decem ber, 1947, confirming the judgment of the District Judge of Purulia in Appeal No. 159 of 1944.
S.P. Sinha (P. K. Bose, with him) for the appel lant.
N.C. Chatterjee and Panchanan Ghosh (Chandra Narayan Naik, with them) for the respondent. 1950.
December 1.
The Judgment of the Court was deliv ered by PATANJALI SASTRI J.
This appeal arises out of a suit brought by the respondent in the court of the Subordinate Judge, Dhanbad, for recovery of arrears of royalty and cess from the appellant and another alleged to be due under a compromise decree passed on the 6th March, 1923, in a previ ous suit between the predecessors in interest of the par ties.
The only plea which is material for the purpose of this appeal is that the compromise decree not having been registered was inadmissible in evidence.
The courts below held that the document did not require registration and gave effect to its terms in decreeing the suit.
The second defendant has preferred this appeal.
The facts are not now in dispute and may be briefly stated.
On 11th March, 1921, one Kumar Krishna Prasad Singh (hereinafter referred to as Kumar) granted a perma nent lease of the right to the underground coal in 5,800 bighas of land belonging to him to Shibsaran Singh and Sitaram Singh (hereinafter referred to as the Singhs) by a registered patta stipulating for a salami of Rs. 8,000 and royalty at the rate of 2a.
per ton of coal raised subject to a minimum of Rs. 8,000 and for certain other cesses and interest.
On 7th June, 1921, Kumar executed another perma nent patta leasing the right to the coal in 500 bighas out of the 5,800 bighas referred to above to one Prayngji Bal lavji Deoshi and his son Harakchand Deoshi (hereinafter referred to as the Deoshis).
By this document.
835 the Deoshis agreed inter alia to pay royalty at the rate of 2a. per ton on all classes of coal raised subject to a minimum of Rs. 750 a year.
The Singhs feeling themselves aggrieved by the latter transaction brought a title suit (No. 1291 of 1921) in the Court of the Subordinate Judge of Dhanbad for a declaration of their title and for possession of the 500 bighas leased to the Deoshis under the aforesaid patta of 7th June, 1921.
To that suit Kumar was made a party as defendant No. 3, the Deoshis being defendants 1 and 2.
The suit was however cornpromised on 6th March, 1923, by all the parties and a decree based on the compromise was also passed on the same day.
The interest of the Singhs was brought to sale in 193S in execution of a decree obtained against them and was purchased by the plaintiff who insti tuted the presnt suit on 3rd October, 1942, claiming the royalty and cesses payable under the compromise decree for the period from Pous 1345 to Asadh 1349 B.S. from defendants 1 and 2 as the representatives of the Deoshis who entered into the compromise of March, 1923.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, it is necessary to set out the relevant terms of the compro mise decree which are as follows : "The plaintiffs (the Singhs) within two months from this date shall pay Rs. 8,000 as salami to defendant No. 3 (Kumar).
Otherwise all the terms of the compromise Will stand cancelled and the plaintiffs shall not be competent to claim any right to or possession over the.land covered by the patta dated 11th March, 1921.
The patta which defend ant No. 3 executed in favour of the plaintiffs in respect of 5,800 bighas of coal land in village Rahraband shall remain in force, and the plaintiffs will get a decree of declara tion of their right and title to the 500 bighas of coal land in dispute but defendants 1 and 2 (the Deoshis) shall hold possession as tenants.
Besides the terms mentioned below, defendants 1 and 2 shall remain bound by all the remaining terms under which they took settlement of the 500 bighas of coal land from defendant No. 3 under 836 patta and Kabuliyat, and both the defendants 1 and 2 shall possess the same under the plaintiffs from generation to generation and all the terms of the said patta and Kabuliyat shall remain effective and in force between them.
Both the defendants 1 and 2 shall remain bound to pay to the plain tiffs commission at the rate of 2a.
per ton on all sorts of coal instead of 2a.
a ton as stated before in the patta of 5,800 bighas of land settled with the plaintiffs.
The plaintiffs shall pay to defendant No. 3 in future the mini mum royalty of Rs. 6,000 instead of Rs. 8,000 as stipulated in the original patta of 11 th March 1921 and commission at the rate of la.
a ton in place of 2a.
a ton as stipulat ed in the patta of March 21 .
Unless the plaintiffs pay to the defendant No. 3 Rs. 8,000 within 2 months from this day they shall not be competent to take out execution of this decree, nor shall they be competent to take posses sion of the land in dispute.
The defendants 1 and 2 within one month from the date of payment of Rs. 8,000 as aforesaid to defendant No. 3 shall execute a new Kabuliyat in favour of the plaintiff in respect of the modified terms stated above, i.e., on the condition to pay commission at the rate of 2a.
per ton.
In the new patta which defendant No. 3 will execute in favour of the plaintiffs he shall embody the condition that the annual minimum royalty will be Rs. 6,000 instead of Rs. 8,000 and commission will be at the rate of la. 9p.
per ton in place of 2a.
per ton as mentioned in the aforesaid patta.
If the defendant No. 3 does not execute the parts on the aforesaid modified terms in favour 'of the plaintiffs within the time aforesaid and both the defendants 1 and 2 also do not execute a kabuliyat on the aforesaid modified terms, then this very rafanama shall be treated as the parts and kabuliyat, and the plaintiffs in accordance with the terms of the rafanama shall pay to defendant No. 3, Rs. 6,000 only as minimum royalty and commission at the rate of la.
per ton with respect to 5,800 bighas and shall continue to realise commission at the rate of 2a. 6p. per ton from defendants 1 and 2 who shall remain bound to pay the same.
" 837 The answer to the question whether this compromise decree requires registration depends on the legal effect of the changes in the status quo ante of the parties brought about by the document.
A careful analysis reveals the following alterations : (1) In the lease to the Singhs, the rate of royalty or commission was reduced from 2a.
per ton of coal raised to la.
per ton and the minimum royalty was reduced from Rs. 8,000 to Rs. 6,000 while the area of coal land in their khas possession was reduced by 500 bighas. (2) In the lease to the Deoshis the rate of royalty or commission was enhanced from 2a.
per ton to 2a.
per ton and tiffs was made payable to the Singhs.
The Singhs and the Deoshis were brought into a new legal relationship, the former accepting the latter as tenants holding the disputed 500 bighas under them in consideration of the latter agreeing to pay the enhanced royalty to the former. (4) The whole arrangement was made conditional on the Singhs paying Rs. 8,000 to Kumar within 2 months from the date of the compromise, it being expressly provided that the Singhs were not to be entitled to execute the decree or to take possession of the disputed area of 503 bighas which evidently had not till then passed into their possession.
Now, sub section (1) of section 17 of the , enumerates five categories of documents of which regis tration is made compulsory which include" (d) leases of immoveable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent;".
Sub sec tion (2) however provided that "nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub section (1)applies to . (vi) any decree or order of court.
" It may be mentioned in passing that this clause was amended with affect from the 1st April, 1930, by the , so as to exclude from the scope of the exception compromise decrees comprising immovable property other than that which is the subject matter of the suit.
But 838 the amendment cannot affect the document here in question which came into existence in 1923.
Before the amendment, the clause was held to cover even compromise decrees comprising immovable property which was not the subject matter of the suit: [Vide Hemanta Kumari Debi vs Midnapur Zamindari Co. ( ')].
That decision applies to the present case and obviates the objection that because the compromise in question covered also the remaining 5,300 bighas which were not the subject matter of the title suit of 1921, it was outside the scope of the exception in sub section (2), clause (vi).
The only question, therefore, is whether the compromise decree is a "lease" [which expression includes "an agreement to lease" by the definition in section 2 (7)] within the meaning of el.
(d) of sub section (1).
It is obvious that if the compromise decree fails within clause (d) of sub section (1) it would not be protected under clause (vi) of sub section (2) which excepts only documents falling under the categories (b) and (c) of sub section (1).
The High Court was of opinion that, on a proper construction of the terms of the compromise, it did not fall under clause (d).
Mano har Lall J., who delivered the leading judgment, observed: "It was a tripartite agreement embodied in the decree of the court and was, therefore, exempt from registration.
It will be oh.served also that so far as the defendants were con cerned, their possession of the 500 bighas was not inter fered with and they still remained in possession as the lessees, but instead of paying the royalty to the plaintiffs it was agreed between all the parties that the defendants would pay the royalty in future to Shibsaran and Sitcram.
If the matter had stood there, the learned Advocate for the appellant could not have seriously contested the position, but he vehemently argued that when the agreement was not to pay the same amount of royalty or commission as previously agreed to but an altered amount of royalty and commission, the document should be held to fall within the mischief of section 17 (1)(d)of the (1) P.C. 839 .
The answer to this contention is, as I have stated just now, to be found in the Full Bench decision of this court :" [see Charu Chandra Mitra 's case ()].
It was there held that a mere alteration of the rent reserved does not make the transaction a new lease so as to bring it within clause (d)of subsection (1).
We are unable to share this view.
It oversimplifies the compromise transaction which, in our opinion, involves much more than a mere alteration of the royalties stipulated for in the previous pattas executed by Kumar.
Nor can we accept the suggestion of Mr. Chatterjee for the respondents theft the compromise operated as an assignment to the Singhs by Kumar of the latter 's reversion under the "lease granted to the Deoshis and all that the latter did was to acknowledge the Singhs as their landlords and attern to them.
On tiffs view it was said that the transaction would not fall under clause (d), although it would fall under clause (b) but then would be saved by the exception in clause (vi) of sub section (2).
The argument, however, overlooks that Kumar had leased the area of 5,800 bighas to the Singhs by his patta dated 11th March, 1921, and the compromise by providing that the Singhs should pay the reduced royalty of 1a.
per ton in respect of the whole area preserved Kumar 's reversion intact.
He could not therefore be deemed to have assigned any part of his inter est in 5,800 bighas as landlord to the Singhs who continue to hold the entire extent as tenants under him.
What the compromise really did was.
as stated already, to bring the Singhs and the Deoshis into a new legal relationship as underlessor and under lessee in respect of 500 bighas which were the subject matter of the title suit; in other words, its legal effect was to create a perpetual underlease be tween the Singhs and the Deoshis which would clearly fall under clause (d) but for the circumstance that it was to take effect only on condition float the Singhs paid Rs. 8,000 to Kumar within 2 months (1) 840 thereafter.
As pointed out by the Judicial Committee in Hemanta Kumar 's case (1) "An agreement for a lease, which a lease is by the statute declared to include, must, in their Lordships ' opinion, be a document which effects an actual demise and operates as a lease .
The phrase which in the context where it occurs and in the statute in which it is found, must in their opinion relate to some document which creates a present and immediate interest in the land.
" The compromise decree expressly provides that unless the sum of Rs. 8,000 was paid within the stipulated time the Singhs were not to execute the decree or to take possession of the disputed property.
Until the payment was made it was impossible to determine whether there would be any under lease or not.
Such a contingent agreement is not within clause (d) and although it is covered by clause (b). is excepted by clause (vi) of sub section ( '2).
We therefore agree with the conclusion of the High Court though on dif ferent grounds and dismiss the appeal with costs.
Appeal dismisseel.



Appeal No. 388 of 1960.
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated February 3, 1959, of the Patna High Court in Election Appeal No. 10 of 1958.
section P. Varma, for the appellant.
L. K. Jha and D. Govardhan, for respondent No. 1.
L. K. Jha and K. K. Sinha, for respondent No. 2. 1960.
November 17.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 471 GAJENDRAGADKAR, J.
Is the appellant Ram Padarath Mahto disqualified for membership of the Bihar Legislature under section 7(d) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereafter called the Act)? That is the short question which arises for our decision in the present appeal by special leave.
The appellant was one of the candidates for the Dalsinghsarai Constituency in the District of Darbhanga in Bihar for the State Legislature.
The said Constituency is a Double Member Constituency; it was required to elect two members, one for the general and the other for the reserved seat for scheduled castes in the Bihar Legislative Assembly.
It appears that the said Constituency called upon voters to elect members on January 19, 1957.
January 29, 1957 was fixed as the last date for the filing of the nomination papers.
The appellant filed his nomination paper on January 28, 1957, and on the next day seven other members filed their nomination papers.
On February 1, 1957, the nomination paper filed by the appellant was rejected by the returning officer on two grounds; he held that the appellant being an Inspector of Co operative Societies was a Government servant at the material time and so was disqualified from standing for election.
He also found that the appellant was a member of a joint and undivided Hindu family which carried on the business of Government as stockiest of grain under a contract between the Government of Bihar and a firm of the joint family known as Nebi Mahton Bishundayal Mahto.
Thereafter the election was duly held, and Mr. Mishri Singh and Mr. Baleshwar Ram, respondents 1 and 2 were declared duly elected to the general and reserved seat respectively.
The validity of this election was challenged by the appellant by his Election Petition No. 428 of 1957.
To this petition he impleaded the two candidates declared to have been duly elected and five others who had contested in the election.
Before the Election Tribunal the appellant urged that he was not in the employ of the Government of Bihar at the material time.
He pointed out that he had resigned his job on January 13, 472 1957, and his resignation had been accepted on January 25, 1957, relieving him from his post as from the later date.
He also contended that there was a partition in his family and that he had no share or interest in the contract in question.
Alternatively it was argued that even if the appellant had an interest in the said contract it did not fall within the mischief of section 7(d) of the Act.
These pleas were traversed by respondents 1 and 2 who contested the appellant 's election petition.
The Election Tribunal found that the petitioner was not a Government servant on the day he filed his nomination paper, and so according to it the returning officer was wrong in rejecting his nomination paper on the ground that he was a Government servant at the material time.
The Election Tribunal rejected the appellant 's case that there was a partition in the family, and held that at the relevant time the appellant continued to be a member of the joint Hindu family which had entered into the contract in question with the Government of Bihar.
However, in its opinion, having regard to the nature of the said contract it was not possible to hold that the appellant was disqualified under section 7(d), and so it came to the conclusion that the returning officer was in error in rejecting the appellant 's nomination paper on this ground as well.
In the result the Tribunal allowed the election petition, declared that the nomination paper had been improperly rejected, and that the election of the two contesting respondents was void.
Against this decision the two contesting respondents filed two appeals in the High Court at Patna (Election Appeals Nos. 9 and 10 of 1958).
The High Court has confirmed the finding of the Tribunal that the appellant was not a Government servant at the material time.
It has also agreed with the conclusion of the Tribunal that at the relevant time the appellant was a member of the undivided Hindu family.
On the construction of the contract, however, it differed from the view adopted by the Tribunal, and it has held that as a result of the said contract the appellant was disqualified under section 7(d) of the Act.
This finding 473 inevitably led to the conclusion that the appellant 's nomination paper had been properly rejected.
On that view the High Court did not think it necessary to consider whether the Tribunal was right in declaring void the election of not only respondent 1 but of respondent 2 as well.
It is against this decision of the High Court that the appellant has come to this Court by special leave; and the only question which is raised on his behalf is that the High Court was in error in coming to the conclusion that he was disqualified under section 7(d).
The decision of this question naturally depends primarily on the construction and effect of the contract in question.
Section 7 of the Act provides for disqualification for membership of Parliament or of State Legislatures.
Section 7(d), as it stood at the material time and with which we are concerned in the present appeal provides,, inter alia, that a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly of a State, if whether by himself or by any person or body of persons in trust for him or for his benefit or on his account, he has any share or interest in a contract for the supply of goods to, or for the execution of any works or the performance of any services undertaken by, the appropriate Government.
On the concurrent findings recorded by the High Court and the Tribunal it cannot now be disputed that the appellant has interest in the contract in question; so that the first part of section 7(d) is satisfied.
The High Court has found that the contract attracts the last part of section 7(d) inasmuch as according to the High Court the Government of Bihar had undertaken to discharge the service of supplying grain to the residents of Bihar and the firm of the appellant 's family had entered into a contract for the performance of the said services.
The last part of section 7(d) postulates that the appropriate Government has undertaken to perform certain specific services, and it is for the performance of such services that the contract had been entered into by a citi zen.
In other words, if a citizen has entered into a contract with the appropriate Government for the 60 474 performance of the services undertaken by the said Government he attracts the application of section 7(d).
This provision inevitably raises two questions: what are the services undertaken by the appropriate Government? Has the contract been entered into for the performance of the said services? At this stage it is necessary to consider the material terms of the contract.
This contract was made on February 8, 1956, between the Governor of Bihar who is described as the first party and the firm which is described as the second party.
The preamble to the contract shows that the first party had to stock and store foodgrains in Darbhanga District for sale in pursuance of the Grain Supply Scheme of the Government for which a proper custodian and bailee for reward was necessary.
It also recites that the second party had applied to become such custodian and bailee of such stock of foodgrains as the first party shall deliver to the second party in one lump or from time to time on terms and in the manner expressly specified under the contract, or as may be necessarily implied.
Clause 1 of the contract provides that the second party shall, at the direction of the first party, take over foodgrains from the railway wagons or from any place as directed by the first party; thereafter the second party had to cause the grains to be stored in his godown at Dalsinghsarai and had to redeliver the same to the first party after weighing either at the second party 's godown approved by the first party or at any other place as directed by the first party.
The movement of the grain had to be done by the second party himself or by a transport contractor appointed by the first party.
Clause 2 imposed on the second party the liability to maintain a register and keep accounts as prescribed thereunder.
Under cl. 3 the second party undertook to keep such stocks and establishments as may be necessary at his own expense.
Clause 4 imposed upon the second party the obligation to protect the stock of foodgrains or to make good the losses except as thereinafter provided: Clauses 5 to 8 are not material for our purpose.
Clause 9 provides that the second party shall deposit the sum of 475 Rs. 5,000 in a Savings Bank account which has been pledged to the District Magistrate, Darbhanga, and comply with the other conditions specified in the clause.
Clause 10 deals with the remuneration of the second party.
It provides that the first party shall be liable to pay to the second party remuneration for the undertaking in this agreement at the rate of Re. 1 per( cent on the value of the stocks moved or taken over from his custody under the orders or directions of the first party or his agent calculated at the rate fixed by the Government from time to time for wholesale sales of grain.
The clause adds that no remuneration shall be payable to the second party if the first party takes over the whole of the balance stock lying with the second party for reasons of the termination of the agreement.
The rest of the clauses need not be recited.
It would thus be seen that the agreement in terms is one of bailment.
The State Government wanted to entrust the work of stocking and storing foodgrains to a custodian or bailee.
In that behalf the appellant 's firm made an application and ultimately was appointed a bailee.
There is no doubt that by this contract the firm has undertaken to do the work of stocking and storing foodgrains belonging to the State Government; and if it can be reasonably held that the service undertaken by the State Government in the present case was that of stocking the foodgrains the contract in question would obviously attract the provisions of section 7(d).
Mr. Varma, however, contends that the service undertaken by the State Government is the sale of foodgrains under its Grain Supply Scheme; and he argues that unless the contract shows that it was for sale of the said goods it cannot attract the provisions of section 7(d).
Unfortunately the scheme adopted by the State Government for the supply of grain has not been produced before the Election Tribunal, and so the precise nature and extent of the services undertaken by the State Government fall to be determined solely by reference to the contract in question.
It is true that the contract relates to the stocking and storing of foodgrains which the State Government wanted to sell to the residents of Bihar; but can it be said 476 that stocking and storing of foodgrains was such an integral or essential part of the selling of goods that a contract for stocking and storing foodgrains should necessarily be regarded as a contract for their sale? In our opinion, it is difficult to accept the argument that stocking and storing of foodgrains is shown to be such an essential and integral part of the supply scheme adopted by the State Government.
Theoretically speaking stocking and storing foodgrains cannot be said to be essential for the purpose of carrying out the scheme of sale of foodgrains, because it would conceivably be possible for the State Government to adopt a scheme whereby goods may be supplied without the State Government having to store them; and so the work of stocking and storing of foodgrains may in some cases be conceivably incidental to the scheme and not its essential part.
It is significant that sale of goods under the contract was never to take place at the godown of the firm.
It had always to take place at other selling, centers or shops; and thus, between the stocking and storing of goods and their sale there is an element of time lag.
The only obligation that was imposed on the firm by this contract was to be a custodian or bailee of the goods, keep them in good order and deliver them after weighment as directed by the first party.
It cannot be denied that the remuneration for the bailee has been fixed at the rate, of Re. 1 per cent on the value of the stocks moved or taken over from his custody; but that only shows the mode or method adopted by the con tract for determining the remuneration including rent of the godowns; it cannot possibly show the relationship of the contract with the sale of goods even indirectly.
Can it be said that the contract entered into by the State Government for purchasing foodgrains from agriculturists who grow them or for transporting them after purchase to the godowns are contracts for the sale or supply of goods? Purchase of goods and their transport are no doubt preparatory to the carrying out of the scheme of selling them or supplying them, and yet it would be difficult to hold that contracts entered into by the State Government with the agriculturists or the transport agency is a contract for the 477 sale of goods.
We have carefully considered the material terms of this contract, and on the record as it stands we are unable to accept the conclusion of the High Court that a contract of bailment which imposed on the bailee the obligation to stock and store the foodgrains in his godown can be said to be a contract for the purpose of the service of sale of grain which the State Government had undertaken within the meaning of section 7(d).
It appears that before the High Court it was not disputed by the appellant that the service whose performance had been undertaken by the State Government consisted in the supply of grain to the people of the State of Bihar; and the High Court thought that from this concession it inevitably followed that the firm had a share and was interested in the contract for the performance of the service undertaken by the Government of Bihar.
It seems to us that the concession made by the appellant does not inevitably or necessarily lead to the inference drawn by the High Court.
If the service undertaken by the State Government is one of supplying grain how does it necessarily follow that a contract by which the bailee undertook to store the grain was a contract for the supply of grain? It may sound technical, but in dealing with a statutory provision which imposes a disqualification on a citizen it would be unreasonable to take merely a broad and general view and ignore the essential points of distinction on the ground that they are technical.
The narrow question is: if the State Government undertook the work of supplying the grain, is the contract one for the supply of grain?; in our opinion, the answer to this question must be in the negative; that is why we think the High Court did not correctly appreciate the effect of the contract when it held that the said contract brought the appellant 's case within the mischief of section 7(d).
In coming to its conclusion the High Court thought that its view was supported by a decision of this Court in N. Satyanathan vs K. Subramanyan (1).
In that case the appellant who was a contractor had entered into an agreement with the Central Government (1) ; 478 whereby he had offered to contract with the Governor General for the provision of a motor vehicle service for the transit and conveyance of all postal articles for the period specified in the contract, and the Governor General had accepted the offer.
As a consideration for the same the Government had agreed to pay to the contractor Rs. 200 per month during the subsistence of the agreement "as his remuneration for the service to be rendered by him".
It appears that on this contract two questions were raised before this Court.
First it was urged that it could not be said that the Central Government had undertaken any service within the meaning of section 7(d) of the Act when it made arrangements for the carriage of mailbags and postal articles through the contractor.
This contention was rejected on the ground that though the Government was not bound in the discharge of its duties as a sovereign State to make provision for postal mail service, it had in fact undertaken to do so under the Indian Post Offices Act for the convenience of the public. "It cannot be gainsaid", observed Sinha, J., as he then was, "that the postal department is rendering a very useful service, and that the appellant has by his contract with the Government undertaken to render that kind of service on a specified route"; and he added, "the present case is a straightforward illustration of the kind of contract contemplated under section 7(d) of the Act".
This straightforward illustration, in our opinion, clearly brings out the class and type of contracts which fall within section 7(d) of the Act.
Government must undertake to render a specified service or specified services and the contract must be for the rendering of the said service or services.
That was precisely what the contract in the case of N. Satyanathan (1) purported to do.
It is difficult to see how this case can be said to support the conclusion of the High Court that the contract for stocking and storing of goods is a contract for rendering the service of supplying and selling the same to the residents of the place.
In this connection Mr. Jha, for the respondents, has drawn our attention to a decision of the Madras High (1) ; 479 Court in V. V. Ramaswamy vs Election Tribunal, Tirunelveli (1).
In that case the Court was concerned with four contracts by which the contracting party agreed "to hold the reserve grain stock belonging to the Government of Madras, safely store it, and dispose of it according to the directions of the Government".
In other words, it was a contract not only for the stocking and storing of foodgrains but also of disposing of it, and that naturally meant that the contract was for service which the State Government had undertaken to perform.
This decision cannot assist the respondents in the present appeal.
In the result we hold that the High Court was not justified in reversing the finding of the Tribunal that the contract in question did not attract the provisions of section 7(d) of the Act.
The appeal must, therefore, be allowed and the order passed by the High Court set aside.
We cannot finally dispose of the matter, because one question still remains to be considered, and that is whether the conclusion that the appellant 's nomination paper had been improperly rejected would lead to the decision that the election of not only respondent 1 but also respondent 2 should be declared to be void.
The Election Tribunal has declared the whole election to be void, and in their respective appeals filed before the High Court both the respondents have challenged the correctness of that finding.
The High Court, however, thought that since in its opinion the nomination paper of the appellant had been properly rejected it was unnecessary to deal with the other point.
The point will now have to be considered by the High Court.
We would, therefore, set aside the order passed by the High Court and remand the pro ceedings to it in order that it may deal with the other question and dispose of the appeals expeditiously in accordance with law.
In the circumstances of this case we direct that the parties should bear their own costs in this Court.
Costs in the High Court will be costs in the appeal before it.
Appeal allowed.


Appeal No. 198 of 1954.
Appeal from the judgment and order dated October 16, 1952, of the former Nagpur High Court in Misc. Petn.; No. 1231 of 1951.
M. section K. Sastri, for the appellant.
H. L. Khaskalam, B. K. B. Naidu and I. N. Shroff, for the respondent.
64 502 1960.
November 18.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by IMAM, J.
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Nagpur High Court dismissing the appellants petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The High Court certified under article 132(1) of the Constitution that the case involved a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
Hence the present appeal.
The appellant was the Ruler of the State of Baster.
After the passing of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, the appellant executed an Instrument of Accession to the Dominion of India on August 14, 1947.
Thereafter, he entered into an agreement with the Dominion of India popularly known as "The Stand Still Agreement".
On December 15, 1947, he entered into an agreement with the Government of India whereby he ceded the State of Baster to the Government of India to be integrated with the Central Provinces and Berar (now the State of Madhya Pradesh) in such manner as the Government of India thought fit.
Con sequently the Governments in India came to have exclusive and plenary authority, jurisdiction and powers over the Baster State with effect from January 1, 1948.
The Legislature of the State of Madhya Pradesh passed the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 (Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1951), hereinafter referred to as the Act, which received the assent of the President of India on January 22, 1951.
The preamble of the Act stated that it was one to provide for the acquisition of the rights of proprietors in estates, mahals, alienated villages and alienated lands in Madhya Pradesh and to make provisions for other matters connected therewith.
Under section 3 of the Act, vesting of proprietary rights in the State Government takes place on certain conditions,, mentioned in that section, being complied with.
The definition of 'proprietor ' is stated in section 2 cl.
(m) and it is "in relation to 503 (i) the Central Provinces, includes an inferior proprietor, a protected thekadar or other thekadar, or protected headman; (ii) the merged territories, means a maufidar including an ex Ruler of an Indian State merged with Madhya Pradesh, a Zamindar, Ilaquedar, Khorposhdar or Jagirdar within the meaning of wajib ul arz, or any sanad, deed or other instrument, and a gaontia or a thekadar of a village in respect of which by or under the provisions contained in the wajib ul arz applicable to such village the maufidar, the gaontia, or the thekadar, as the case may be, has a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village;".
The definition of 'mahal ' is stated in section 2(j) and it is "mahal", in relation to merged territories, means any area other than land in possession of a raiyat which has been separately assessed to land revenue, whether such land revenue be payable or has been released, compounded for or redeemed in whole or in part;".
Before the High Court the appellant contended that he was still a Sovereign Ruler and absolute owner of the villages specified in Schedules A and B of his petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
He urged that his rights had been recognized and guaranteed under the agreements entered into by him with the Government of India.
The provisions of the Act, therefore, did not apply to him.
It was further contended that the provisions of the Act did not apply to a Ruler or to the private property of a Ruler which was not assessed to land revenue.
He relied on article 6 of the Instrument of Accession and the first paragraph of article 3 of the Merger Agreement.
The High Court held that if the petitioner 's rights under article 6 of the Instrument of Accession and article 3 of the Merger Agreement had been infringed it was clear from the provisions of article 363 of the Constitution that interference by the courts was barred in disputes arising out of these two instruments.
The High Court was also of the opinion that article 362 of the Constitu tion was of no assistance to the appellant.
504 After referring to the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act, the High Court was of the opinion that the word 'maufidar ' in section 2(m) of the Act had not been used in any narrow or technical sense.
A 'maufidar ' was not only a person to whom a grant of maufi lands had been made but was also one who held land which was exempt from the payment of "rent or tax".
It accordingly rejected the contention on behalf of the appellant that the word 'maufidar ' is necessarily confined to a grantee from the State or Ruler and therefore a Ruler could not conceivably be a maufidar.
The High Court also rejected the contention on behalf of the appellant that as he was a "Ruler" within the meaning of that expression in article 366(22) of the Constitution he did not come within the expression 'ex Ruler ' as contained in the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act.
The expression 'Ruler ' as defined in article 366(22) of the Constitution applied only for interpreting the provisions of the Constitution.
The expression 'ex Ruler ' given in the Act must therefore be given the ordinary dictionary meaning.
According to Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 'Ruler ' means "one who, or that which, exercises rule, especially of a supreme or sovereign kind.
One who has control, management, or head ship within some limited sphere".
The High Court accordingly took the view that although the appellant did exercise such a rule in the past he ceased to exercise it in his former Domain after the agreements of accession and merger had come into operation.
Accordingly the appellant must be regarded as an ex Ruler and as he was also a maufidar he fell within the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act.
The question whether the villages mentioned in Schedules A and B of the petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution fell in any of the categories, "Estates, Mahals, Alienated lands", was also considered by the High Court.
In its opinion they did not fall within the category of Estates or Alienated lands but they did fall within the category of Mahals.
According to the definition of 'Mahal ' in section 2(j) of the Act the same must be separately assessed to land 505 revenue.
According to the appellant they had not been assessed to land revenue but this was denied on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
The High Court was of the opinion that in these circumstances it was for the appellant to establish that the villages in question had never been assessed to land revenue but no evidence had been led to this effect.
On the contrary, according to the High Court, it would appear from the documents on the record that the villages known as 'Bhandar villages ' had been assessed to land revenue.
As the rest of the villages in Schedule A and the villages in Schedule B, upto the date of the High Court judgment, had not been recognized as the private property of the appellant by the Government of India as required by the second and third paragraphs of the Merger Agreement, the appellant could not assert his ownership over them.
The High Court, accordingly, dismissed his petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
Two questions in the main were urged before us (1) whether the appellant is a proprietor within the meaning of that expression in the Act and (2) whether the villages in question came within the definition of the word 'mahal ' contained in the Act.
On behalf of the appellant it had also been urged that the Act could not defeat the rights of the appellant guaranteed under article 3 of the Merger Agreement.
It seems clear to us, however, that in view of the provisions of article 363(1) of the Constitution any dispute arising out of the Merger Agreement or the Instrument of Accession is beyond the competence of the courts to enquire into.
The High Court rightly decided this point against the appellant.
With reference to the first point we would first consider whether the appellant is an ex Ruler for the purposes of the Act.
That he is so factually cannot be denied, since he ceded his State to the Government of India to be integrated with the Central Provinces and Berar (now the State of Madhya Pradesh) in such manner as the Government of India thought fit.
He further ceded to the Government ' of India full and exclusive authority, jurisdiction and powers in relation 506 to the governance of his State when he agreed that the administration of that State would be transferred to the Government of India as from January 1, 1948.
The question is whether his recognition for the purposes of the Constitution as Ruler by virtue of the provisions of article 366(22) of the Constitution of India continues his status as a Ruler for purposes other than the Constitution.
article 366(22) states: " "Ruler" in relation to an Indian State means the Prince, Chief or other person by whom any such covenant or agreement as is referred to in clause (1) of article 291 was entered into and who for the time being is recognised by the President as the Ruler of the State, and includes any person who for the time being is recognised by the President as the successor of such Ruler".
Article 291 refers to the privy purse payable to Rulers.
It states: "Where under any covenant or agreement entered into by the Ruler of any Indian State before the commencement of this Constitution, the payment of any sums, free of tax, has been guaranteed or assured by the Government of the Dominion of India to any Ruler of such State as privy purse (a) such sums shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of India; and (b) the sums so paid to any Ruler shall be exempt from all taxes on income.
" Article 291 refers to any covenant or agreement entered into by the Ruler of any Indian State before the commencement of the Constitution.
The covenant or agreement referred to in this Article certainly includes the Instrument of Accession and the Merger Agreement.
The effect of the Merger Agreement is clearly one by which factually a Ruler of an Indian State ceases to be a Ruler but for the purposes of the Constitution and for the purposes of the privy purse guaranteed, he is a Ruler as defined in article 366(22) of the Constitution.
There is nothing in the provisions of article 366(22) which requires a court to recognise such a person as a Ruler for purposes outside the Constitution.
In our opinion, the High Court rightly held that 507 the appellant was an ex Ruler and that article 366(22) of the Constitution did not make him a Ruler for the purposes of the Act.
As the appellant was an 'ex Ruler ', he was within the class of persons who were by name specifically included in the definition of 'proprietor ' and therefore clearly within the scope of the Act.
That the appellant was not only an ex Ruler but a maufidar appears to us to be clear.
The ordinary dictionary meaning of maufi is "Released, exempted, exempt from the payment of rent or tax, rent free" and maufidar is "A holder of rent free land, a grantee".
It was common ground in the High Court that the villages in question were exempt from the payment of rent or tax.
In our opinion, the High Court rightly took the view that the expression 'maufidar ' was not necessarily confined to a grantee from a State or a Ruler of a State.
A maufidar could be a person who was the holder of land which was exempted from the payment of rent or tax.
In our opinion, the appellant certainly came within the expression 'maufidar ' besides being an ex Ruler ' of an Indian State merged with Madhya Pradesh.
It is, however, contended on behalf of the appellant that the most important part of the definition was the concluding portion where it was stated that in the case of a maufidar he must be a person who by or under the provisions contained in the wajib ul arz applicable to his village, had the right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village.
It was contended that even if the appellant was a maufidar, there was nothing to show that with reference to any village held by him it was entered in the wajib ul arz, that he had a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village.
In the petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, filed by the appellant in the High Court, it was nowhere asserted that even if he was regarded as a maufidar it was not entered in the wajib ul arz with respect to any of his maufi villages that he had a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such villages.
From the judgment of the High 508 Court it would appear that no such argument was advanced before it.
In the application for a certificate under article 132(1) of the Constitution we can find no mention of this.
In the statement of the case filed in this Court also there is no mention of this fact.
There is thus no material on the record to establish that the appellant as a maufidar had no right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in his villages.
The burden was on the appellant to prove this fact which he never attempted to discharge.
It is impossible therefore to accept this contention on behalf of the appellant raised for the first time before us in the course of the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.
Regarding the second point arising out of the definition of 'Mahal ', the High Court definitely found that the petitioner had given no evidence to establish that the villages in question were not assessed to land revenue.
On the contrary, at least with reference to the Bhandar villages documents on the record showed that these villages had been assessed to land revenue.
Since it was a question of fact whether the villages had been assessed to land revenue, which was denied on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh, the High Court rightly held that the contention of the appellant in this respect could not be accepted.
As for the other villages, in Schedules A and B of the petition of the appellant under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution the High Court, in our opinion, rightly held that the petition was not maintainable as these villages had not yet been recognised by the Government of India as the private property of the appellant.
In our opinion, the appeal accordingly fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.


Appeals Nos. 155 to 160 of 1956.
Appeals from the judgments and orders of the Bombay High Court dated July 6, 1954, in Special Civil Applications Nos. 393, 395, 409 and 632 of 1954; July 19, 1954, in Special Civil Application No. 1205 of 1954; and July 30, 1954, in Special Civil Application No. 1309 of 1954.
Purshottam Trikamdas, V. M. Limaye, E. Udayaratnam and section section Shukla, for the appellants.
H. N. Sanyal, Additional Solicitor General of India, N. P. Nathwani, K. L. Hathi and R. H. Dhebar, for the respondents. 1960.
October 3.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by WANCHOO J.
These six appeals on a certificate granted by the Bombay High Court raise a common question as to the constitutionality of the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act, No. XLII of 1953, (hereinafter called the Act) and will be disposed of by this judgment.
The appellants hold personal inams which are covered by Bombay Acts Nos. 11 and VII of 1863.
The Act was attacked on a number of grounds in the High Court of which only two have 945 been urged before us, namely, (i) that the property which has been dealt with under the Act is not an estate and (ii) that no compensation has been provided in the Act for taking away the property of the appellants: The writ petitions were opposed by the State of Bombay and the main contention on its behalf was that the Act was protected under article 31 A of the Constitution.
Before we deal with the two points raised before us, we should like briefly to refer to the rights which holders of personal inams had by virtue of Bombay Acts Nos.
II and VII of 1863.
Act No. 11 extended to certain parts of the Presidency of Bombay and dealt with holders of lands in those parts who were holding lands wholly or partially exempt from the payment of government land revenue.
The Act provided for the cases of holders of such lands whose title to exemption had not till then been formally adjudicated.
It laid down that if such holders of lands consented to submit to the terms and conditions prescribed in the Act in preference to being obliged to prove their title to the exemption enjoyed by them, the Provincial Government would be prepared to finally authorise and guarantee the continuance, in perpetuity, of the said land to the said holders, their heirs and assigns upon the said terms and subject to the said conditions.
The main provision of the Act in this respect was that such holders of land would be entitled to keep their lands in perpetuity subject to payment of (i) a fixed annual payment as nazrana in commutation of all claims of the Crown in respect of succession and transfer which shall be calculated at the rate of one anna for each rupee of assessment and (ii) a quit rent equal to one fourth of the assessment.
There were other provisions in the Act for those cases where the holders of such lands were not prepared to abide by the conditions of the Act and wanted their claims to be adjudicated; but we are not concerned with those provisions for present purposes.
Thus the main right which the holders of lands got by Act 11 was that they held their lands on payment of one fourth of the assessment instead of full 946 assessment plus further one sixteenth of the assessment; thus they paid in all five annas in the rupee of the full assessment and retained eleven annas in the rupee for themselves.
Act No. VII dealt with similar holders of lands in the remaining parts of the Presidency of Bombay, and made similar provisions with this difference that such holders of lands were to pay two annas for each rupee of the assessment as quit rent under section 6.
Thus those who came under Act VII paid only two annas in the rupee of the assessment and retained fourteen annas in the rupee for themselves.
We now turn to the provisions of the Act.
By section 2(c) inamdar " is defined as a holder of personal inam and includes any person lawfully holding under or through him.
Section 2(d) defines an " inam village or " inam land " while section 2(e) defines " personal inam Section 3 provides that the Act will not apply to certain inams including devasthan inams or inams held by religious or charitable institutions.
The Explanation to the section lays down that by the term " inams held by religious or charitable institu tions " will be meant devasthan or dharmadaya inams granted or recognized by the ruling authority for the time being for a religious or charitable institution and entered as such in the alienation register kept under section 53 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 (hereinafter called the Code), or in the records kept under the rules made under the .
Thus so far as religious or charitable institutions were concerned those inams which they held from the very beginning as devasthan or dharmadaya inams and which were entered in the relevant records were out of the provisions of the Act.
Section 4 extinguishes all personal inams and save as expressly provided by or under the provisions of the Act, all rights legally subsisting on the said date in respect of such personal inams were also extinguished subject to certain exceptions which are, however, not material now.
Section 5 provides that all inam villages or inam lands are and shall be liable to the payment of land revenue in accordance with the provisions of the Code or the 947 rules made thereunder and the provisions of the Code and the rules relating to unalienated lands shall apply to such lands.
It further provides that an inamdar in respect of the inam land in his actual possession or in possession of a person holding from him other than an inferior holder (subject to an exception which we shall mention just now) would be primarily liable to the State Government for the payment of land revenue due in respect of such land held by him and shall be entitled to all the rights and shall be liable to all obligations in respect of such land as an occupant under the Code or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force.
Thus by section 5 the holder of a personal inam became for all practical purposes an occupant under the Code liable to pay full land revenue and the advantage that he had under Acts II and VII of 1863 of paying only a part of the land revenue and retaining the rest for himself was taken away.
The exception which we have refer. red to above was where the inferior holder holding inam land paid an amount equal to the annual assess ment to the holder of the personal inam, such inferior holder would be liable to the State Government and would become an occupant of the land under the Code.
Section 7 then vests certain lands like public roads, paths and lanes, the bridges, ditches, dikes and fences, the bed of the sea and harbours, creeks below high water mark and of rivers, streams, nallas, lakes, wells and tanks, and all canals, water courses, all standing and flowing water, all unbuilt village sites, all waste lands and all uncultivated lands (excluding lands used for building or other non agricultural purposes) in the State Government and extinguishes the rights of inamdar in them.
Section 8 deals with right to trees and section 9 with right to mines and mineral products.
Section 10 provides for compensation for extinguishment of rights under section 7 while section 11 gives a right of appeal from the order of the Collector under section 10.
Sections 12 to 16 deal with procedural matters and section 17 provides for payment of compensation for extinction or modification of an inamdar 's right which may not be covered by section 10.
Sub section (5) 948 of section 17 however says that " nothing in this section shall entitle any person to compensation on the ground that any inam village or inam land which was wholly or partially exempt from the payment of land revenue has been under the provisions of this Act made subject to the payment of full assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Code ".
Section 17 A provides for the issue of bonds while section 18 provides for the application of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands; Act, 1948, to any inam village or. inam land or the mutual rights and obligations of an inamdar and his tenants.
Section 19 provides for making of rules and section 20 deals with repeals and amendments.
It will be seen from this analysis of the Act that the main provisions are sections 4, 5 and 7.
So far as section 7 is concerned, there is provision for compensation with respect to lands vested in the State by virtue of that section.
But no compensation is provided for the rights extinguished by as. 4 and 5.
As we have seen already the main right of an inamdar was to hold his lands on payment of land revenue which was less than the full assessment and it is this right which has been abolished by sections 4 and 5 and the inamdar will now have to pay the full assessment.
No compensation has been provided for the loss which the inamdar suffers by having to pay the full assessment.
This brings us to the first contention.
On behalf of the appellants it is urged that what sections 4 and 5 extinguish is the right of the inamdar to appropriate to himself the difference between the full assessment and the quit rent, and this is not an estate within the meaning of Art, 3 1 A of the Constitution.
The relevant provisions in article 31 A for present purposes aref these: " 31 A (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing for (a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights, or (b). . . . (c). . . . 949 (d). . . . (e). . . . shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is in consistent with or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by article 14, art 19 or article 31 ; Provided. . . (2) In this article (a) the expression ' estate ' shall, in relation to any local area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area, and shall also include any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States of Madras and Kerala any janmam right; (b) the expression 'rights ' in relation to an estate shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub proprietor, under proprietor, tenure holder, raiyat, under raiyat or other intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue ".
It will be, clear from the definition of the word estate " in article 31 A(2)(a) that it specifically includes an " inam " within it.
As such it would be in our opinion idle to contend that inams are not estates within the meaning of the expression " estate " for the purpose of article 31 A.
The Act specifically deals with inams and would thus be obviously protected under article 31 A from any attack under article 14, article 19 or article 31.
It is, however, urged that the right of the inamdar to appropriate to himself that part of full assessment which was left over after he had paid the quit rent to the Government is not a right in an estate.
This contention also has no force.
Inams being estates, the right of the inamdar to retain part of the full assessment over and above the quit rent payable to the Government arises because he holds the inam estate.
The right therefore can be nothing more than a right in an estate.
Besides the definition of the expression " rights " in article 31 A(2)(b) makes the position clear beyond all doubt, for it provides that the rights in relation to an estate would include any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue 121 950 Even if it were possible to say that the right of the inamdar to appropriate to himself the difference between the full assessment and the quit rent was not a right in an estate as such, it would become a right in an estate by virtue of this inclusive definition for the inamdar 's right could only be a right or privilege in respect of land revenue.
Besides, it is clear that the right in question falls under section 3(5) of the Code and as such also it is an estate under Art.31 A.
The contention of the appellants therefore that inams dealt with by the Act are not covered by the expression " estate " in article 31 A fails.
Their further contention that their right to retain the difference between full assessment and quit rent is not a right in an estate also fails.
The Act therefore when it extinguishes or modifies the rights of inamdars in the inam estates is clearly protected by article 31 A.
The next contention is that the Act does not provide for compensation and is therefore ultra vires in view of article 31.
We find, however, that the Act has provided for compensation under section 10 so far as that part of inam lands which are vested in the State by section 7 are concerned.
Further section 17 provides for compensation in a possible case where anything has been left out by section 7 and the inamdar is entitled to compensation for it.
It is true that by sub section (5) of section 17 no compensation is to be paid for the loss to the inamdar of what he used to get because of the difference between the quit rent and the full assessment.
It is how ever clear that article 31 A saves the Act from any attack under article 31 which is the only Article providing for compensation.
In this view of the matter the constitutionality of the Act cannot be assailed on the ground that it provides no compensation for extinction of certain rights.
There is no force in these appeals and they are hereby dismissed with costs.
One set only of hearing costs.
Appeals dismissed.


Appeal No. 198 of 1954.
Appeal from the judgment and order dated October 16, 1952, of the former Nagpur High Court in Misc.
; No. 1231 of 1951.
M. section K. Sastri, for the appellant.
H. L. Khaskalam, B. K. B. Naidu and I. N. Shroff, for the respondent.
64 502 1960.
November 18.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by IMAM, J.
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Nagpur High Court dismissing the appellants petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The High Court certified under article 132(1) of the Constitution that the case involved a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
Hence the present appeal.
The appellant was the Ruler of the State of Baster.
After the passing of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, the appellant executed an Instrument of Accession to the Dominion of India on August 14, 1947.
Thereafter, he entered into an agreement with the Dominion of India popularly known as "The Stand Still Agreement".
On December 15, 1947, he entered into an agreement with the Government of India whereby he ceded the State of Baster to the Government of India to be integrated with the Central Provinces and Berar (now the State of Madhya Pradesh) in such manner as the Government of India thought fit.
Con sequently the Governments in India came to have exclusive and plenary authority, jurisdiction and powers over the Baster State with effect from January 1, 1948.
The Legislature of the State of Madhya Pradesh passed the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 (Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1951), hereinafter referred to as the Act, which received the assent of the President of India on January 22, 1951.
The preamble of the Act stated that it was one to provide for the acquisition of the rights of proprietors in estates, mahals, alienated villages and alienated lands in Madhya Pradesh and to make provisions for other matters connected therewith.
Under section 3 of the Act, vesting of proprietary rights in the State Government takes place on certain conditions,, mentioned in that section, being complied with.
The definition of 'proprietor ' is stated in section 2 cl.
(m) and it is "in relation to 503 (i) the Central Provinces, includes an inferior proprietor, a protected thekadar or other thekadar, or protected headman; (ii) the merged territories, means a maufidar including an ex Ruler of an Indian State merged with Madhya Pradesh, a Zamindar, Ilaquedar, Khorposhdar or Jagirdar within the meaning of wajib ul arz, or any sanad, deed or other instrument, and a gaontia or a thekadar of a village in respect of which by or under the provisions contained in the wajib ul arz applicable to such village the maufidar, the gaontia, or the thekadar, as the case may be, has a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village;".
The definition of 'mahal ' is stated in section 2(j) and it is "mahal", in relation to merged territories, means any area other than land in possession of a raiyat which has been separately assessed to land revenue, whether such land revenue be payable or has been released, compounded for or redeemed in whole or in part;".
Before the High Court the appellant contended that he was still a Sovereign Ruler and absolute owner of the villages specified in Schedules A and B of his petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
He urged that his rights had been recognized and guaranteed under the agreements entered into by him with the Government of India.
The provisions of the Act, therefore, did not apply to him.
It was further contended that the provisions of the Act did not apply to a Ruler or to the private property of a Ruler which was not assessed to land revenue.
He relied on article 6 of the Instrument of Accession and the first paragraph of article 3 of the Merger Agreement.
The High Court held that if the petitioner 's rights under article 6 of the Instrument of Accession and article 3 of the Merger Agreement had been infringed it was clear from the provisions of article 363 of the Constitution that interference by the courts was barred in disputes arising out of these two instruments.
The High Court was also of the opinion that article 362 of the Constitu tion was of no assistance to the appellant.
504 After referring to the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act, the High Court was of the opinion that the word 'maufidar ' in section 2(m) of the Act had not been used in any narrow or technical sense.
A 'maufidar ' was not only a person to whom a grant of maufi lands had been made but was also one who held land which was exempt from the payment of "rent or tax".
It accordingly rejected the contention on behalf of the appellant that the word 'maufidar ' is necessarily confined to a grantee from the State or Ruler and therefore a Ruler could not conceivably be a maufidar.
The High Court also rejected the contention on behalf of the appellant that as he was a "Ruler" within the meaning of that expression in article 366(22) of the Constitution he did not come within the expression 'ex Ruler ' as contained in the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act.
The expression 'Ruler ' as defined in article 366(22) of the Constitution applied only for interpreting the provisions of the Constitution.
The expression 'ex Ruler ' given in the Act must therefore be given the ordinary dictionary meaning.
According to Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 'Ruler ' means "one who, or that which, exercises rule, especially of a supreme or sovereign kind.
One who has control, management, or head ship within some limited sphere".
The High Court accordingly took the view that although the appellant did exercise such a rule in the past he ceased to exercise it in his former Domain after the agreements of accession and merger had come into operation.
Accordingly the appellant must be regarded as an ex Ruler and as he was also a maufidar he fell within the definition of the word 'proprietor ' in the Act.
The question whether the villages mentioned in Schedules A and B of the petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution fell in any of the categories, "Estates, Mahals, Alienated lands", was also considered by the High Court.
In its opinion they did not fall within the category of Estates or Alienated lands but they did fall within the category of Mahals.
According to the definition of 'Mahal ' in section 2(j) of the Act the same must be separately assessed to land 505 revenue.
According to the appellant they had not been assessed to land revenue but this was denied on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
The High Court was of the opinion that in these circumstances it was for the appellant to establish that the villages in question had never been assessed to land revenue but no evidence had been led to this effect.
On the contrary, according to the High Court, it would appear from the documents on the record that the villages known as 'Bhandar villages ' had been assessed to land revenue.
As the rest of the villages in Schedule A and the villages in Schedule B, upto the date of the High Court judgment, had not been recognized as the private property of the appellant by the Government of India as required by the second and third paragraphs of the Merger Agreement, the appellant could not assert his ownership over them.
The High Court, accordingly, dismissed his petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
Two questions in the main were urged before us (1) whether the appellant is a proprietor within the meaning of that expression in the Act and (2) whether the villages in question came within the definition of the word 'mahal ' contained in the Act.
On behalf of the appellant it had also been urged that the Act could not defeat the rights of the appellant guaranteed under article 3 of the Merger Agreement.
It seems clear to us, however, that in view of the provisions of article 363(1) of the Constitution any dispute arising out of the Merger Agreement or the Instrument of Accession is beyond the competence of the courts to enquire into.
The High Court rightly decided this point against the appellant.
With reference to the first point we would first consider whether the appellant is an ex Ruler for the purposes of the Act.
That he is so factually cannot be denied, since he ceded his State to the Government of India to be integrated with the Central Provinces and Berar (now the State of Madhya Pradesh) in such manner as the Government of India thought fit.
He further ceded to the Government ' of India full and exclusive authority, jurisdiction and powers in relation 506 to the governance of his State when he agreed that the administration of that State would be transferred to the Government of India as from January 1, 1948.
The question is whether his recognition for the purposes of the Constitution as Ruler by virtue of the provisions of article 366(22) of the Constitution of India continues his status as a Ruler for purposes other than the Constitution.
article 366(22) states: " "Ruler" in relation to an Indian State means the Prince, Chief or other person by whom any such covenant or agreement as is referred to in clause (1) of article 291 was entered into and who for the time being is recognised by the President as the Ruler of the State, and includes any person who for the time being is recognised by the President as the successor of such Ruler".
Article 291 refers to the privy purse payable to Rulers.
It states: "Where under any covenant or agreement entered into by the Ruler of any Indian State before the commencement of this Constitution, the payment of any sums, free of tax, has been guaranteed or assured by the Government of the Dominion of India to any Ruler of such State as privy purse (a) such sums shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of India; and (b) the sums so paid to any Ruler shall be exempt from all taxes on income.
" Article 291 refers to any covenant or agreement entered into by the Ruler of any Indian State before the commencement of the Constitution.
The covenant or agreement referred to in this Article certainly includes the Instrument of Accession and the Merger Agreement.
The effect of the Merger Agreement is clearly one by which factually a Ruler of an Indian State ceases to be a Ruler but for the purposes of the Constitution and for the purposes of the privy purse guaranteed, he is a Ruler as defined in article 366(22) of the Constitution.
There is nothing in the provisions of article 366(22) which requires a court to recognise such a person as a Ruler for purposes outside the Constitution.
In our opinion, the High Court rightly held that 507 the appellant was an ex Ruler and that article 366(22) of the Constitution did not make him a Ruler for the purposes of the Act.
As the appellant was an 'ex Ruler ', he was within the class of persons who were by name specifically included in the definition of 'proprietor ' and therefore clearly within the scope of the Act.
That the appellant was not only an ex Ruler but a maufidar appears to us to be clear.
The ordinary dictionary meaning of maufi is "Released, exempted, exempt from the payment of rent or tax, rent free" and maufidar is "A holder of rent free land, a grantee".
It was common ground in the High Court that the villages in question were exempt from the payment of rent or tax.
In our opinion, the High Court rightly took the view that the expression 'maufidar ' was not necessarily confined to a grantee from a State or a Ruler of a State.
A maufidar could be a person who was the holder of land which was exempted from the payment of rent or tax.
In our opinion, the appellant certainly came within the expression 'maufidar ' besides being an ex Ruler ' of an Indian State merged with Madhya Pradesh.
It is, however, contended on behalf of the appellant that the most important part of the definition was the concluding portion where it was stated that in the case of a maufidar he must be a person who by or under the provisions contained in the wajib ul arz applicable to his village, had the right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village.
It was contended that even if the appellant was a maufidar, there was nothing to show that with reference to any village held by him it was entered in the wajib ul arz, that he had a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such village.
In the petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, filed by the appellant in the High Court, it was nowhere asserted that even if he was regarded as a maufidar it was not entered in the wajib ul arz with respect to any of his maufi villages that he had a right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in such villages.
From the judgment of the High 508 Court it would appear that no such argument was advanced before it.
In the application for a certificate under article 132(1) of the Constitution we can find no mention of this.
In the statement of the case filed in this Court also there is no mention of this fact.
There is thus no material on the record to establish that the appellant as a maufidar had no right to recover rent or revenue from persons holding land in his villages.
The burden was on the appellant to prove this fact which he never attempted to discharge.
It is impossible therefore to accept this contention on behalf of the appellant raised for the first time before us in the course of the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.
Regarding the second point arising out of the definition of 'Mahal ', the High Court definitely found that the petitioner had given no evidence to establish that the villages in question were not assessed to land revenue.
On the contrary, at least with reference to the Bhandar villages documents on the record showed that these villages had been assessed to land revenue.
Since it was a question of fact whether the villages had been assessed to land revenue, which was denied on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh, the High Court rightly held that the contention of the appellant in this respect could not be accepted.
As for the other villages, in Schedules A and B of the petition of the appellant under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution the High Court, in our opinion, rightly held that the petition was not maintainable as these villages had not yet been recognised by the Government of India as the private property of the appellant.
In our opinion, the appeal accordingly fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.


Appeal No. 285 of 1959.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Decree dated the 13th July, 1956, of the Patna High Court in M. J. C. No. 404 of 1954.
M. C. Setalvad, Attorney General for India and section P. Varma, for the Appellants.
A. V. Viswanatha Sastri, Suresh Aggarwala and D. P. Singh, for the Respondent. 1960.
November 21.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 524 SINHA, C.J.
This appeal, by special leave, is directed against the judgment and order of the High Court of Patna dated July 13, 1956 disposing of a reference under section 25(1) of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947, which hereinafter will be referred to as the Act, made by the Board of Revenue, Bihar.
The facts of this case have never been in dispute and may shortly be stated as follows.
The appellant is a Corporation incorporated under the Damodar Valley Corporation Act (XIV of 1948) and will hereinafter be referred to as the Corporation.
It is a multipurpose Corporation, one of its objects being the construction of a number of dams in Bihar and Bengal with a view to controlling floods and utilising the stored water for purposes of generation of electricity.
One of such dams is the Konar Dam in the district of Hazaribagh in Bihar.
For the construction of the aforesaid Dam the Corporation entered into an agreement with Messrs Hind Construction Ltd. and Messrs Patel Engineering Co. Ltd. on May 24, 1950, and appointed them contractors for the aforesaid purpose.
They will hereinafter be referred to as the Contractors.
As a result of a change in the design of the Dam, it became necessary to enter into a supplementary agreement and on March 10, 1951, cl. 8 of Part II of the original agreement was amended and a fresh cl. 8 was substituted.
Under the new cl. 8 of the agreement, as amended, the Corporation agreed to make available to the contractors such equipment as was necessary and suitable for the construction aforesaid.
The Contractors are charged the actual price paid by the Corporation for the equipment and machinery thus made available, inclusive of freight and customs duty, if any, as also the cost of transport, but excluding sales tax.
The equipment thus supplied by the Corporation to the Contractors was classified into two groups, Group A and Group B, as detailed in Schedule No. 2.
The machinery in Group A was to be taken over from the Contractors by the Corporation, after the completion of the work at their "residual value" which was to be calculated in the manner set out in the agreement.
The machinery in Group B was to become the 525 property of the Contractors after its full price had been paid by them.
No more need be said about the machinery in Group B, because there is no dispute about that group, the Contractors having accepted the position that Group B machinery had been sold to them.
The controversy now remaining between the parties relates to the machinery in Group A.
On August 12, 1952, the Superintendent of Sales Tax, Hazaribagh, assessed the Corporation under section 13(5) of the Act for the period April, 1950 to March, 1952.
It is not necessary to set out the details of the tax demand, because the amount is not in controversy.
What was contended before the authorities below and in this Court was that the transaction in question did not amount to a "sale" within the meaning of the Act.
The Superintendent rejected the contention raised on behalf of the Corporation that it was not liable to pay the tax in respect of the machinery sup plied to the Contractors.
The Corporation went up in appeal to the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax against the said order of assessment.
By his order dated May 5, 1953, the Deputy Commissioner rejected the contention of the appellant as to its liability under the Act, but made certain amendments in the assessment which are not material to the points in controversy before us.
The Deputy Commissioner repelling the Corporation 's contentions based on the Act, held inter alia that the supply of equipment in Group A of the agreement aforesaid amounted to a sale and was not a hire ; that the condition in the agreement for the "taking over" of the equipment on conditions laid down in the agreement was in its essence a condition of repurchase and that the Corporation was a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act.
The Corporation moved the Board of Revenue, Bihar, in its revisional jurisdiction under section 24 of the Act.
The Board of Revenue by its resolution dated October 1, 1953, rejected the revisional application and upheld the order of the authorities below.
Thereafter, the Corporation made an application to the Board of Revenue under section 25 of the Act for a reference to refer the following 67 526 questions to the High Court at Patna, namely, (a) whether the assessment under section 13(5) of the Act is maintainable, (b) whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, it can be held that the property in the goods included in Schedule A did pass to the Contractors and the transaction amounted to a sale, and (c) whether the terms of the agreement amount to sale transactions with the Contractors and taking over by the Corporation amounts to repurchase.
This application was made on December 22, 1953, but when the application for making a reference to the High Court came up for hearing before the Board of Revenue on May 20, 1954, and after the parties had been heard, counsel for the Corporation sought leave of the Board to withdraw questions (a) and (c) from the proposed reference and the Board passed the following order: "Leave is sought by the learned advocate for the petitioner to drop questions (a) and (c) from the reference.
The leave is granted.
There remains only question (b) for reference to the High Court. . " Thus only question (b) set out above was referred to the High Court for its decision.
After hearing the parties, a Division Bench of the High Court, Ramaswami, C. J. and Raj Kishore Prasad, J., heard the reference and come to the conclusion by its judgment dated July 13, 1956, that the reference should be answered in the affirmative, namely, that the transaction in question amounted to a sale within the meaning of section 2(g) of the Act.
Thereupon the Corporation made an application headed as under article 132(1) of the Constitution and prayed that the High Court "be pleased to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of India and grant the necessary certificate that this case is otherwise a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court. . " Apart from raising the ground of attack dealt with by the High Court on the reference as aforesaid, the Corporation at the time of the hearing of the applica tion appears to have raised other questions as would appear from the following extract from the judgment and order of the High Court dated January 31, 1957 : 527 "It was conceded by learned counsel for the petitioner that the case does not fulfill the requirements of Article 133(1) of the Constitution; but the argument is that leave may be granted under Article 132 of the Constitution as there is a substantial question of law with regard to the interpretation of the Constitution involved in this case.
We are unable to accept this argument as correct.
It is not possible for us to hold that there is any substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution involved in this case.
The question at issue was purely a matter of construction of section 2(g) of the Bihar Sales Tax Act and that question was decided by this Court in favour of the State of Bihar and against the petitioner.
It is argued now on behalf of the petitioner that the provisions of section 2(g) of the Bihar Sales Tax Act are ultra vires of the Constitution, but no such question was dealt with or decided by the High Court in the reference.
We do not, therefore, consider that this case satisfies the requirements of article 132(1) of the Constitution and the petitioner is not entitled to grant of a certificate for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court under this Article.
The application is accordingly dismissed.
" Having failed to obtain the necessary certificate from the High Court, the Corporation moved this Court and obtained special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution.
The leave was granted on March 31, 1958.
Though the scope of the decision of the High Court under section 25 of the Act on a reference made to it is limited, the Corporation has raised certain additional points of controversy, which did not form part of the decision of the High Court.
Apart from the question whether the transaction in question amounted to a sale within the meaning of the Act, the statement of the case on behalf of the appellant raises the following additional grounds of attack, namely, (1) that the Corporation is not a dealer within the meaning of the Act, (2) that the proviso to section 2(g) of the Act is ultra vires the Bihar Legislature and (3) that the Act itself is ultra vires the Bihar Legislature by reason of the 528 legislation being beyond the scope of entry 48 in List II of Schedule 7 of the Government of India Act, 1935.
Hence, a preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the respondent that the additional grounds of attack were not open to the Corporation in this Court.
It is, therefore, necessary first to determine whether the additional grounds of attack set out above are open to the Corporation.
In our opinion, those additional grounds are not open.
They were never raised at any stage of the proceedings before the authorities below, or in the High Court.
This Court is sitting in appeal over the decision of the High Court under section 25 of the Act.
The High Court in coming to its conclusion was acting only in an advisory capacity.
It is well settled that the High Court acting in its advisory capacity under the taxing statute cannot go beyond the questions referred to it, or on a reference called by it.
The scope of the appeal to this Court, even by special leave, cannot be extended beyond the scope of the controversy that could have been legally raised before the High Court.
It is manifest that the High Court could not have expressed its opinion on any matter other than the question actually before it as a result of the reference made by the Board of Revenue.
The preliminary objection must, therefore, be allowed and the appeal limited to the question whether the transaction in question in this case amounted to a sale within the meaning of the Act.
It is manifest that this controversy between the parties has to be resolved with reference to the terms of the contract itself.
Clause 8 of the agreement as amended is a very complex one as will presently appear from the following extracts, being the relevant portions of that clause : "The Corporation may hire or make available such of its equipment as is suitable for construction for the use of the Contractor.
The actual prices paid by the Corporation for the equipment thus made available, inclusive of freight, insurance and custom duties, if any, and the cost of its transport to site but excluding such tax as sales tax whether local, municipal, State or Central, shall be charged to the 529 Contractor and the equipment shall remain the property of the Corporation until the full prices thereof have been realised from the Contractor.
Equipment lent for the Contractor 's use, if any, shall be charged to him on terms of hiring to be mutually agreed upon; such terms will cover interest on capital cost and the depreciation of the equipment.
The Corporation will supply to the Contractor the machinery mentioned in Schedule No. 2, Group A and Group B below." Then follows a description seriatim of the many items of machinery in Group A with the number of such machinery and the approximate cost thereof.
In this Group A, there are fourteen items of which it is only necessary to mention the first one, that is to say, four excavators with accessories approximately valued at Rs. 12,46,390; and No. 14, two excavators of another model, approximately costing Rs. 3,35,000.
The total approximate cost of the machinery in Group A is estimated to be Rs. 42,63,305.
Then follow the descriptions of machinery in Group B, the approximate cost of which is Rs. 21,84,148.
Then follow certain conditions in respect of equipments included in Group A, in these words: "The Corporation will take over from the Contractor item 1 and 14 on the completion of the work at a residual value calculated on the basis of the actual number of hours worked assuming the total life to be 30,000 hours and assuming that the machinery will be properly looked after during the period of its operation.
The remaining items of this group will be taken over by the Corporation at their residual value taking into account the actual number of hours worked and the standard life of such machinery for which Schedule F. as last relished, ? of the U. section Bureau of Industrial Revenue, on the probable useful life and depreciation rates allowable for Income Tax purpose (vide Engineering News Record dated March 17, 1949) will serve as a basis, provided that the machinery shall be properly looked after by the Contractor during the period of its operation.
Provided further that such residual value of the machinery shall be assessed 530 jointly by representatives of the Corporation and of the Contractor and that in case of difference of opinion between the two parties the matter shall be settled through arbitration by a third party to be agreed to both by the Corporation and the Contractor.
The items included in this group will be taken over by the Corporation from the Contractor either on the completion of the work or at an earlier date if the Contractor so wishes, provided that in the latter case the equipments will be taken over by the Corporation only when they are declared surplus at Konar and such declaration is duly certified by the Consulting Engineer, within a period of 15 days of such declaration being received by the Corporation.
In respect of the machinery which shall have been delivered to the Contractor on or before the 31st of December 1950, their cost shall be recovered from the Contractor in eighteen equal instalments beginning with January 1951 and in respect of the remaining items included in this group of machinery, their cost will be recovered from the Contractor in eighteen equal instalments beginning with July 1951, provided that these remaining items shall have been delivered to the Contractor prior to the last specified date.
Provided (a) that the total actual price for these equipments which has been provisionally estimated at Rs. 42,63,305 will be chargeable to the Contractor as per first para of clause 1 above.
(b) that after approximately two thirds of total cost or an amount of Rs. 28,43,000 (Rupees twenty eight lakhs forty three thousand) approximately has been recovered from the Contractor on account of these equipments the Corporation will consider the date or dates when it could take over the equipments still under use by the Contractor, assess the, extent to which they have already been depreciated and thereby arrive at, their residual value; and (c) that the recovery or refund of the amount payable by or to the Contractor on account of these equipments will be decided only if the Corporation is fully satisfied that their residual life at the time of 531 their being finally handed over to the Corporation shall under no circumstances fall below one third of their respective standard life as agreed upon by the Corporation and the Contractor." Then follow terms and conditions in respect of Group 'B ' which are not relevant to our purpose.
Thereafter, the following conditions appear: "In respect of equipments whether in Group A or B made available by the Corporation to the Contractor.
The following conditions shall apply to all equipments, i.e., those included in Group A and B above and others, if any (a) The Contractor shall continuously maintain proper machine cards separately in respect of each item of equipment, clearly showing therein, day by day, the number of actual hours the machine has worked together with the dates and other relevant particulars.
(b) The Contractor shall maintain all such equipments in good running condition and shall regularly and efficiently give service to all plant and machinery, as may be required by the Corporation 's Chief Engineer who shall have the right to inspect, either personally or through his authorised representatives all such plant and equipment and the machine cards maintained in respect thereof at mutually convenient hours.
(c) No item of equipment made available by the Corporation on loan or hire shall at any time be removed from the work site under any circumstances until the full cost thereof has been recovered from the Contractor by the Corporation and thereafter only if in the opinion of the Consulting Engineer the removal of such item or items is not likely to impede the satisfactory prosecution of the work.
Similarly no item of equipment or material belonging to the Contractor but towards the cost of which money has been advanced by the Corporation shall at any time be removed from the work site under any circumstances until the amount of money so advanced has been recovered from the Contractor by 532 the Corporation and thereafter if in the opinion of the Consulting Engineer the removal of such item or items is not likely to impede the satisfactory prosecution of the work.
(d) The Corporation shall supply to the Contractor whatever spares have been procured or ordered for the equipment already supplied or to be supplied by the Corporation to the Contractor under the terms of this Agreement and that thereafter the replenishment of the stock of spares shall be entirely the responsibility of the Contractor who shall therefore take active steps in time to procure fresh spares so as to maintain a sufficient reserve.
The spares to be supplied by the Corporation will be issued to the Contractor by the Executive Engineer, Konar as and when required by the Contractor against indent accompanied by a certificate that the spares previously issued to him have been actually used up on the machines for which they were intended.
(e) Whenever spares are issued to the Contractor in accordance with this provision, their actual prices inclusive of freight, insurance and customs but excluding storage and handling charges shall be debited against him and recovered from his next fortnightly bill.
(f) In order to enable the Contractor to take active steps for planning the procurement of additional spares in advance, the Corporation shall forthwith furnish to him a complete list of all the spares which it has procured or ordered for the equipment to be supplied to the Contractor.
" The portions quoted above contain the relevant terms and conditions in respect of the transaction in question, so far as it is necessary to know them for the purpose of this case.
It will be noticed that the Corporation made available to the Contractors different kinds of machinery and equipment detailed in Group A of the approximate value of Rs. 42,63,000 odd, for which the price paid by the Corporation inclusive of freight, insurance, customs duty etc.
has to be charged to them.
But the machinery and the equipment so 533 made available to the Contractors were to remain the property of the Corporation until the, full price thereof had been realised from the Contractors.
It is also noteworthy that the agreement makes a distinction between the aforesaid part of the agreement and the equipment lent to the contractors in respect of which the contractors had to be charged in terms of hiring, including interest on capital cost and the depreciation of equipment.
Thus clearly the agreement between the parties contemplated two kinds of dealings between them, namely (1) the supply of machinery and equipments by the Corporation to the Contractors and (2) loan on hire of other equipment on terms to be mutually agreed between them in respect of the machinery and equipment supplied by the Corporation to the Contractors.
There is a further condition that the Corporation will take over from the contractors items 1 and 14, specifically referred to above, and the other items in Group A at their "residual value" calculated on the basis indicated in the paragraph following the description of the machinery and the equipments.
But there is a condition added that the "taking over" is dependent upon the condition that the machinery will be properly looked after during the period of its operation.
There is an additional condition to the taking over by the Corporation, namely, the work for which they were meant had been completed, or earlier, at the choice of the Contractors, provided that they are declared surplus for the purposes of the construction of the Konar Dam and so certified by the Consulting Engineer.
Hence, it is not an unconditional agreement to take over the machinery and equipment as in Group B.
The total approximate price of Rs. 42,63,305 is payable by the Contractors in 18 equal instalments.
Out of the total cost thus made realisable from the Contractors two thirds, namely, Rs. 28,42,000 approximately, has to be realised in any case.
After the two thirds amount aforesaid has been realised from the contractors on account of supply of the equipments by the Corporation, the Corporation had to consider the date or dates of the "taking over" of the equipment after assessing the extent to which it 534 had depreciated as a result of the working on the project in order to arrive at the "residual value" of the same.
The refund of the one third of the price or such other sum as may be determined as the "residual value" would depend upon the further condition that the Corporation was fully satisfied that their "residual life" shall, under no circumstances, fall below one third of their respective standard life as agreed upon by the parties.
It would, thus, appear that the "taking over" of such of the equipments as were available to be returned was not an unconditional term.
The Corporation was bound to take them over only if it was satisfied that their "residual life" was not less than one third of the standard life fixed by the parties.
It is clear from the terms and conditions quoted above that there was no right in the contractors to return any of the machinery and equipments at any time they liked, or found it convenient to do so.
The conditions which apply to all equipments, whether in Group A or in Group B, are also relevant to determine the nature of the transaction.
The contractors are required to "continuously maintain proper machine cards showing certain relevant particulars".
It is their duty to maintain the equipments in good running condition and to regularly and effectively service them.
No item of machinery and equipment could be removed by the contractors under any circumstances until the full cost thereof had been recovered from them and even then only if the removal of those items of machinery or equipment was not likely to impede the satisfactory progress of the work.
Then follows the most important condition that the Contractors themselves shall have to replenish their stock of spare parts of the machinery made available to them by the Corporation.
When spare parts are supplied to the Contractors by the Corporation, they shall be liable for the actual price of those parts inclusive of freight, insurance and customs duty.
Those substantially are the terms of the contract between the parties and the sole question for determination in this appeal is whether, in respect of the machinery and equipments admittedly supplied by the Corporation to the Contractors, it was a mere 535 contract of hiring, as contended on behalf of the appellant Corporation, or a sale or a hire purchase, as contended on behalf of the respondent State.
The law on the subject is not in doubt, but the difficulty arises in applying that law to the facts and circumstances of a particular case on a proper construction of the document evidencing the transaction between the parties.
It is well settled that a mere contract of hiring, without more, is a species of the contract of bailment, which does not create a title in the bailee, but the law of hire purchase has undergone consider able development during the last half a century or more and has introduced a number of variations, thus leading to categories, and it becomes a question of some nicety as to which category a particular contract between the parties comes under.
Ordinarily, a contract of hire purchase confers no title on the hirer, but a mere option to purchase on fulfillment of certain conditions.
But a contract of hire purchase may also provide for the agreement to purchase the thing hired by deferred payments subject to the condition that title to the thing shall not pass until all the instalments have been paid.
There may be other variations of a contract of hire purchase depending upon the terms agreed between the parties.
When rights in third parties have been created by acts of parties or by operation of law, the question, which does not arise here, may arise as to what exactly were the rights and obligations of the parties to the original contract.
It is equally well settled that for the purpose of determining as to which category a particular contract comes under, the court will look at the substance of the agreement and not at the mere words describing the category.
One of the tests to determine the question whether a particular agreement is a contract of mere hiring or whether it is a contract of purchase on a system of deferred payments 'of the purchase price is whether there is any binding obligation on the hirer to purchase the goods.
Another useful test to determine such a controversy is whether there is a right reserved to the hirer to return the goods at any time during the subsistence of the contract.
If there is such a right reserved, then 536 clearly there is no contract of sale, vide Helby vs Matthews and others (1).
Applying these two tests to the transaction in the present case, it becomes clear that it was a case of sale of goods with a condition of repurchase on certain conditions depending upon the satisfaction of the Corporation as to whether the "residual life" of the machinery or the equipment was not less than one third of the standard life in accordance with the terms agreed between the parties.
It is clear on those terms that there is no right reserved to the contractors to return the goods at any time that they found it convenient or necessary.
On the other hand, they were bound to pay two thirds of the total approximate price fixed by the parties in equal instalments.
The Contractors were not bound under the terms to return any of the machinery or the equipments, nor was the Corporation bound to take them back unconditionally.
The term in the agreement regarding the "taking over" of the machinery or equipments by the Corporation on payment of the "residual value" is wholly inconsistent with a contract of mere hiring and is more consistent with the property in the goods having passed to the Contractors, subject to the payment of all the instalments of the purchase pride.
Furthermore, the stipulation that the Contractors themselves will have to supply the spare parts, as and when needed, for replacements of the worn out parts is also consistent with the case of the respondent that title had passed to the contractors and that they were responsible for the upkeep of the machinery and equipments and for depreciation.
If it were a mere contract of hiring, the owner of the goods would have continued to be liable for replacements of worn out parts and for depreciation.
Applying those tests to the terms of the agreement between the parties, it is clear that the transaction was a sale on deferred payments with an option to repurchase and not a mere contract of hiring, as contended on behalf of the appellant.
It must, therefore, be held that the judgment of the High Court is entirely correct and the appeal must be dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.


Appeal No. 353 of 1959.
Appeal from the judgment and order dated April 22, 1958, of the Punjab High Court (Circuit Bench) at Delhi in Civil Writ No. 257 D of 1957.
M. C. Setalvad, Attorney General of India, section N. Andley, J. B. Dadachanji Rameshwar Nath and P. L. Vohra, for the Appellant.
G. section Pathak, R. L. Anand and Janardan Sharma, for the respondent No. 2. 591 1960.
November 22.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by WANCHOO, J.
This is an appeal on a certificate granted by the Punjab High Court.
Sharda Singh (hereinafter called the respondent) was in the service of the appellant mills.
On August 28, 1956, the respondent was transferred from the night shift to the day shift in accordance with para 9 of the Standing Orders governing the workmen in the appellant mills.
At that time an industrial dispute was pending bet ween the appellant mills and their workmen.
The transfer was to take effect from August 30, 1956; but the respondent failed to report for work in the day shift and was marked absent.
On September 1, 1956, he submitted an application to the General Manager to the effect that he had reported for duty on August 30, at 10 30 p.m. and had worked during the whole night, but had not been marked present.
He had again gone to the mills on the night of August 31, but was not allowed to work on the ground that he had been transferred to the day shift.
He complained that he had been dealt with arbitrarily in order to harass him.
Though he said that he had no objection to carrying out the orders, he requested the manager to intervene and save him from the high handed action taken against him, adding that the mills would be responsible for his wages for the days he was not allowed to work.
On September 4, 1956, he made an application to the industrial tribunal, where the previous dispute was pending, under section 33 A of the , No. XIV of 1947, (hereinafter called the Act) and complained that he had been transferred without any rhyme or reason from one shift to another and that this amounted to alteration in the conditions of his service, which was prejudicial and detrimental to his interest.
As this alteration was made against the provisions of section 33 of the Act, he prayed for necessary relief from the tribunal under section 33 A.
On September 5, 1956, the General Manager replied to the letter of September 1, and told the respondent that his transfer from.
one shift to the other had been ordered on 592 August 28, and he had been told to report for work in the day shift from August 30; but instead of obeying the order which was made in the normal course and report for work as directed he had deliberately disobeyed the order and reported for work on August 30 in the night shift.
He was then ordered to leave and report for work in the day shift.
He however did not even then report for work in the day shift and absented himself intentionally and thus disobeyed the order of transfer.
The General Manager therefore called upon the respondent to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken against him for wailfully refusing to obey the lawful orders of the departmental officers and he was asked to submit his explanation within 48 hours.
The respondent submitted his explanation on September 7, 1956.
Soon after it appears the appellant mills received notice of the application under section 33 A and they submitted a reply of it on October 5, 1956.
Their case was that transfer from one shift to another was within the power of the management and could not be said to be an alteration in the terms and conditions of service to the prejudice of the workman and therefore the complaint under section 33 A was not maintainable.
The appellant mills also pointed out that a domestic inquiry was being held into the subsequent conduct of the respondent and prayed that proceedings in the application under section 33 A should be stayed till the domestic inquiry was concluded.
No action seems to have been taken on this complaint under section 33 A, for which the appellant mills might as they had prayed for stay However, the domestic inquiry continued and on February 25, be partly responsible of those proceedings.
against the respondent 1957, the inquiry officer reported that t e charge of misconduct was proved.
Thereupon the General Manager passed an order on March 5, 1957, that in view of the serious misconduct of the respondent and looking into his past records, he should be dismissed; but as an industrial dispute was pending then, the General Manager ordered that the permission of the industrial tribunal should be taken before the order of dismissal was 593 passed and an application should be made for seeking such permission under section 33 of the Act.
In the meantime, a notification was issued on March 1, 1957, by which 10th March, 1957, was fixed for the coming into force of certain provisions of the Central Act, No. XXXVI of 1956, by which sections 33 and 33 A were amended.
The amendment made a substantial change in section 33 and this change came into effect from March 10, 1957.
The change was that the total ban on the employer against altering any condition of ser vice to the prejudice of workmen and against any action for misconduct was modified.
The amended section provided that where an employer intended to take action in regard to any matter connected with the dispute or in regard to any misconduct connected with the dispute, he could only do so with the express permission in writing of the authority before which the dispute was pending; but where the matter in regard to which the employer wanted to take action in accordance with the Standing Orders applicable to a workman was not connected with the dispute or the misconduct for which action was proposed to be taken was not connected with the dispute, the employer could take such action as he thought proper, subject only to this that in case of discharge or dismissal one month 's wages should be paid and an application should be made to the tribunal before which the dispute was pending for approval of the action taken against the employee by the employer.
In view of this change in the law, the appellant mills thought that as the misconduct of the respondent in the present case was not connected with the dispute then pending adjudication, they were entitled to dismiss him after paying him one month 's wages and applying for approval of the action taken by them.
Consequently, no application was made to the tribunal for permission in accordance with the order of the General Manager of March 5, 1957, already referred to.
Later, on April 2, 19579 an order of dismissal was passed by the General Manager after tendering one month 's wages to the respondent and an application was made to the authority concerned for approval of the action taken against the respondent.
594 Thereupon the respondent filed another application under section 33 A of the Act on April 9, 1957, in which he complained that the appellant mills had terminated his services without the express permission of the tribunal and that this was a contravention of the provisions of section 33 of the Act; he therefore prayed for necessary relief.
On April 18, 1957, an interim order was passed by the tribunal on this application by which as a measure of interim relief, the appellant mills were ordered to permit the respondent to work with effect from April 19 and the respondent was directed to report for duty.
It was also ordered that if the management failed to take the respondent back, the respondent would be paid his full wages with effect from April 19 after he had reported for duty.
On May 6, 1957, however, the application dated April 9, 1957, was dismissed as defective and therefore the interim order of April 18 also came to an end.
On the same day (namely, May 6, 1957), the respondent made another application under section 33 A in which he removed the defects and again complained that his dismissal on April 2, 1957, without the express previous permission of the tribunal was against section 33 and prayed for proper relief.
It is this application which is pending at present and has not been disposed of, though more than three years have gone by.
It is also not clear what has happened to the first application of September 4,1956, in which the respondent complained that his conditions of service had been altered to his prejudice by his transfer from one shift to another.
Applications under section 33 and section 33 A of the Act should be disposed of quickly and it is a matter of regret that this matter is pending for over three years, though the appellant mills must also share the blame for this state of affairs ' However, the appellant mills gave a reply on May 14,1957, to the last application under section 33 A and objected that there was no breach of section 33 of the Act, their case being that the amended section 33 applied to the order of dismissal passed on April 2, 1957.
Further, on the merits, the appellant mills ' case was that the dismissal was in the circumstances justified.
595 The matter came up before the tribunal on May 16, 1957.
On this date, the tribunal again passed an interim order, which was to the effect that as a measure of interim relief, the respondent should be permitted to work from May 17 and the respondent was directed to report for duty.
It was further ordered that in case the management failed to take him back, they would pay him his full wages with effect from the date he reported for duty.
Thereupon the appellant mills filed a writ petition before the High Court.
Their main contention before the High Court was two fold.
In the first place it was urged that the tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain an application under section 33 A of the Act in the circumstances of this case after the amended sections 33 and 33 A came into force from March 10, 1957.
In the alternative it was contended that the tribunal had no jurisdiction to pass an interim order of reinstatement or in lieu thereof payment of full wages to the respondent even before considering the questions raised in the application under section 33 A on the merits.
The High Court held on the first point that in view of section 30 of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, No. XXXVI of 1956, the present case would be governed by section 33 as it was before the amendment and therefore the tribunal would have jurisdiction to entertain the complaint dated May 6, 1957, under section 33 A of the Act.
On the second point, the High Court held that the order of the tribunal granting interim relief was within its jurisdiction and was justified.
In consequence, the writ petition was dismissed.
Thereupon the appellant mills applied and was granted a certificate by the High Court to appeal to this Court; and that is how the matter has come up before us.
The same two points which were raised in the High Court have been urged before us.
We are of opinion that it is not necessary in the present case to decide the first point because we have come to the conclusion that the interim order of May 16, 1957, is manifestly erroneous in law and cannot be supported.
Apart from the question whether the tribunal had jurisdiction 596 to pass an interim order like this without making an interim award, (a point which was considered and left open by this Court in The Management of Hotel Imperial vs Hotel Workers ' Union (1)), we are of opinion that where the tribunal is dealing with an application under section 33 A of the Act and the question before it is whether an order of dismissal is against the provisions of section 33 it would be wrong in law for the tribunal to grant reinstatement or full wages in case the employer did not take the workman back in its service as an interim measure.
It is clear that in case of a complaint under section 33 A based on dismissal against the provisions of section 33, the final order which the tribunal can pass in case it is in favour of the workman, would be for reinstatement.
That final order would be passed only if the employer fails to justify the dismissal before the tribunal, either by showing that proper domestic inquiry was held which established the misconduct or in case no domestic inquiry was held by producing evidence before the tribunal to justify the dismissal: See Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs All India Punjab National Bank Employees ' Federation (2), where it was held that in an inquiry under section 33 A, the employee would not succeed in obtaining an order of reinstatement merely by proving contravention of section 33 by the employer.
After such contravention is proved it would still be open to the employer to justify the impugned dismissal on the merits.
That is a part of the dispute which the tribunal has to consider because the complaint made by the employee is to be treated as an industrial dispute and all the relevant aspects of the said dispute fall to be considered under section 33 A.
Therefore, when a tribunal is considering a complaint under section 33 A and it has finally to decide whether an employee should be reinstated or not, it is not open to the tribunal to order reinstatement as an interim relief, for that would be giving the workman the very relief which he could get only if on a trial of the complaint the employer failed to justify the order of dismissal.
The interim relief ordered in this case was that the work (1) ; (2) ; 597 man should be permitted to work: in other words he was ordered to be reinstated; in the alternative it was ordered that if the management did not take him back they should pay him his full wages.
We are of opinion that such an order cannot be passed in law as an interim relief, for that would amount to giving the, respondent at the outset the relief to which he would be entitled only if the employer failed in the proceedings under section 33 A. As was pointed out in Hotel Imperial 's case (1),ordinarily, interim relief should not be the whole relief that the workmen would get if they succeeded finally.
The order therefore of the tribunal in this case allowing reinstatement as an interim relief or in lieu thereof payment of full wages is manifestly erroneous and must therefore be set aside.
We therefore allow the appeal, set aside the order of the High Court as well as of the tribunal dated May 16, 1957, granting interim relief.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted to us that we should grant some interim relief in case we came to the conclusion that the order of the tribunal should be set aside.
In the circumstances of this case we do not think that interim relief to the respondent is justified hereafter.
As we have pointed above, applications under sections 33 and 33 A should be dealt with expeditiously.
We trust that the applications dated September 4, 1956, which appears to have been overlooked and of May 6, 1957, will now be dealt with expeditiously and finally disposed of by the tribunal, as all applications under section 33 A should be.
In the circumstances we pass no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
